<style type="text/css">

.focus {
  color: var(--theme-foreground-focus);
}

.invert {
  background-color: var(--theme-foreground-alt);
  color: var(--theme-background);
}

.crop {
  border-radius: 8px;
  margin: 1rem;
  max-width: calc(50% - 2rem);
  box-shadow: 0 0 0 0.75px rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.2), 0 6px 12px 6px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.4);
  aspect-ratio: 3024 / 1888;
  object-fit: cover;
  object-position: 0 100%;
}

.wbr::before {
  content: "\200b";
}

.wide {
  max-width: 960px;
}

figcaption code {
  font-size: 90%; /* TODO move to global.css */
}

</style>

## Classifying computational works

The overarching question for each paper that we classify is the following

> Did the authors had to run code to produce the paper, aka perform simulations, produce visualization, or run statistical analysis. 

This is hard to answer. We play the following question game to label computational papers:

- Is there a mention of using programming languages (Python, R, matlab, Julia, ...)?
- Do they straight up claim to use computational methods or do computational X?
  - Is there a mention of computational methods, aka topic modeling, BERT, word embeddings, automated text analysis, text mining, etc?
  - Do they cite a F/OSS library in their references?
- Do they have way too much data to do it without programming?
- Do their figures look like they've been generated by a programming language?

To answer those questions, we

 1. Read the abstract on semantic scholar
 1. Look at the extracted figures. If there is not abstract, stop there. Not worth to annotate the paper.
 1. Skim the paper, if needed

FAQs:

- Papers talking _about_ computational social science or digital humanities are not computational. This is why simply matching sentences with keywords is not good enough.
- There might be figures in a paper, but they are from someone else and the authors are just _talking_ about it to make a point.
- There might be figures in a paper, but not produced by code. When they are schema, it is obvious. When it is excel or SAS, you need to distinguish between those and figures produced by programming languages. Not always easy, but generally doable.

#### Computional complexity

The idea that a paper is computational or not is highly abstract. Some papers are computational by virtue of running some simulation, as it is often the case in physics, while computational social science increasingly have to combine data source such as web scrapping and APIs, simulate a generative proces, fit a model, validate, and finally build tailored data visulizations. Obviously, the latter case is more 'computational' in that it requires more code; the code for the data pipeline, simulation, analysis, and visualization. It is not all that different than the notion of technological complexity, where more bits of innovation in tools is a measure of complexity in cultural evolution. Similarly, we could count bits of computation in a paper. It is more cumbersome, as there are more things to keep track by paper.

One dumb way to get that would be to match for key words, then disambiguate their meaning. For instance, you look for occurences of _simulation_ in a paper, then you have a model that classify the intent behind its mention. Was it because the authors _run_  simulations to gain insights from their problem? Do they critic someone else using simulation? Perhap they just _mention_ the idea of simulation en passant. 

We have the following taxonomy:

```js
const taxonomy = FileAttachment("./data/comp-taxonomy.json").json();
```

<div>${resize((width) => plot_tree(taxonomy, {width, height: 500}))}</div>

---

## OpenAlex taxonomy

```js
const oa_taxonomy = FileAttachment("./data/oa-fields2domain.json").json();
```

<div>${resize((width) => plot_tree(oa_taxonomy, {width, height: 2400}))}</div>


---

## s2orc fields of science

```js
const s2orc_taxonomy = FileAttachment("./data/s2orc-fos.json").json();
```
<div>${resize((width) => plot_tree(s2orc_taxonomy, {width, height: 400}))}</div>


---

## Web of Science

```js
const wos_taxonomy = FileAttachment("./data/WOS-fields2domain.json").json();
```
<div>${resize((width) => plot_tree(wos_taxonomy, {width, height: 1700}))}</div>


```js
function plot_tree(data, {width, height} = {}) {
  return Plot.plot({
    axis: null,
    margin: 10,
    marginLeft: 260,
    marginRight: 260,
    width,
    height,
    marks: [
      Plot.tree(data, {path: "name", delimiter: ".", tip: true})
    ]
  })
}
```