## Vexing questions about the ontology of social groups {#gronto.section.review}

We review recurrent questions about groups that have shifted meaning
over time (see Table [\[table:1\]](#table:1){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:1"}). We show that many answers to those vexing
questions were determined by authors' ontological stance on group
realism, i.e., the idea that group states are somehow irreducible to
individual interactions. We introduce four different periods where the
debates took various forms; early social sciences, social network
analysis, organizational sciences (and collective action theory), and
the evolutionary dynamics of group-level features.

### Early social sciences

When asking themselves '**What are groups (Q1)?**', early social
scientists and anthropologists offered a variety of perspectives---some
focusing on the nature of group membership, others on the persistence
and function of social structures. Their debates set the stage for the
ontological and modeling challenges that we face today. As we will see,
on one side stand the group realists, concerned with the supervening
forces that act upon individuals; on the other, the methodological
individualists, who reject the idea that groups possess enough
ontological reality to be studied independently.

Charles Cooley (1909) famously distinguished between *primary
groups*---small, tightly knit collectives based on intimate, enduring
ties---and *secondary groups*, which are larger, more impersonal, and
goal-oriented [@cooley_social_1909]. This distinction later informed
structuralist views that differentiate between core and peripheral
members within groups [@homans_human_1950; @freeman_sociological_1992].
Around the same time, William Graham Sumner (1906) emphasized the
emotional dimension of group identity, arguing that "we-groups"
(in-groups) shape loyalty, patriotism, and favoritism toward others
[@sumner_folkways_1906]. These early thinkers thus approached
Q2---**what kinds of groups exist**---by highlighting the structural,
phenomenological, and affective differences across group types.

In contrast to Simmel's focus on relational structure, Durkheim, Sumner,
and Spencer offered a more explicitly emergentist view of social
phenomena. For Ã‰mile Durkheim, society is not reducible to individual
actions but is instead made up of "social facts"---external forces that
shape individual behavior [@durkheim_rules_1895]. These facts emerge
from the "composition of individualities with particular consciousness"
and give rise to a collective mind. In Durkheim's view, emergence is
tied to functionalism: individual roles contribute to maintaining
system-level stability. Sumner shared a similar perspective. In
*Folkways* (1906), he argued that group norms and customs emerge from
countless repeated actions over time rather than deliberate intention.
These norms, once formed, constrain behavior and persist independently
of any one person's will. As he put it, folkways are not the product of
"human purpose and wit", but arise "unconsciously" through repeated
"petty acts" [@sumner_folkways_1906 p.4]. Herbert Spencer further
extended this logic by applying evolutionary analogies to social life.
He likened societies to organisms, with individuals playing specialized
roles akin to organs in a body [@spencer_principles_1896]. This
organism-like analogy **(Q5)** offered an explanation for how social
systems can persist despite the turnover of individuals **(Q7)**: it is
the continuity of roles and functions that sustains the collective, not
the specific people who occupy them. Like Durkheim, Sumner viewed these
emergent forces as structuring individual behavior in ways that could
not be reduced to individual intentions.

In contrast, the rise of *methodological individualism (MI)* challenged
these emergentist views. MI holds that explanations in the social
sciences should begin with individuals---their beliefs, preferences, and
actions---rather than abstract group-level entities. Joseph Schumpeter
(1909) famously argued that "only individuals can feel wants", making
them the fundamental unit of analysis in economics
[@schumpeter_concept_1909]. While Schumpeter did not formalize rational
choice theory himself, his focus on individual agency and utility laid
important philosophical groundwork for later developments in rational
choice models, where individuals are treated as having consistent
preferences over outcomes, from which market and social phenomena can
emerge. Similarly, one of the key figures in modern sociology, Max Weber
(1913, 1922), insisted that even large bureaucracies are the result of
individual rule-following and decision-making, not emergent collective
minds [@weber_categories_1913; @weber_economy_1922]. In this
perspective, society does not function like an organism; its structure
arises from decentralized rule-based behavior rather than system-level
goals. In this way, MI promotes a nominalist ontology: groups are
epiphenomena, not actors, social forces, or entities in their own right.

In the debate between group realists and MI, we note the presence of
Georg Simmel (1898), who pioneered a structural approach that sought to
unify group behavior through patterns of interaction. He introduced the
idea that motifs---social configurations involving more than two
individuals---are essential to understanding group dynamics **(Q9)**. In
particular, triads (three-person groups) exhibit dynamics that dyads
cannot, offering "lower intensity, higher stability" and allowing
changes in consensus or mediation of conflict
[@simmel_persistence_1898]. Simmel emphasized that the **persistence of
groups (Q4)** depends not just on who belongs to a group but on the
structure of their interactions. He also introduced the concept of
*duality*---the tension between individual identity and group
membership---which affects both cohesion and fragmentation. His work
thus connected psychological experiences with higher-order interaction
patterns, providing early insight into how group boundaries emerge and
stabilize **(Q6)**. Although Simmel didn't have a strong stance on the
existence of groups, we will see that structuralism later favored
patterns of *individual interactions* over those of groups, showing the
subtle influence of how group interactions ended up being secondary to
individuals.

### The Human Group, Personal influence, and Social network analysis

<figure id="fig:homans">
<embed src="Chapters/figs/homans.pdf" />
<figcaption>The evolution of groups in schema form, adapted from <span
class="citation"
data-cites="homans_human_1950 wellman_structural_1988 feld_focused_1981"></span>.
On the left, Homans (1950) depicts social exchanges as part of the
group, without representing social structures. Wellman (1989) aims to
summarize multiple interacting social structures, representing intimate
and nonintimate ties and types of relationships: kin (immediate and
extended), friends, coworkers, and neighbors. Feld (1981) provides a
dual perspective, with foci represented as the intersection of varying
social groups.</figcaption>
</figure>

The work of George C. Homans on small-group research marked a turning
point in the study of social dynamics, providing a "playbook" for
individual-based sociological studies (CITE). In *The Human Group*
(1950), he focused on interpersonal interactions within small groups,
measuring observable behaviors---conversation length, participation,
initiation, sentiment---and interpreting them through behaviorist
principles [@homans_human_1950]. Drawing on case studies from factory
workers, gangs, families, and field observations, he proposed several
"elementary propositions" about social exchanges, including the idea
that individuals repeat behaviors that are rewarded (the "Success
Proposition") and that the value of rewards diminishes over time (he
calls it the "Deprivation--Satiation Proposition"). Strongly influenced
by behaviorist psychology, which focuses on observable behaviors rather
than hidden mental (or group) states, Homans sought to explain social
cohesion **(Q4)** and socialization processes **(Q17)** through
reductionist mechanisms grounded in individual behavior and
reinforcement.

While Homans focused on face-to-face interaction, Jacob Moreno (1934)
extended this logic to group structure through sociograms---early
visualizations of social networks based on sociometric tests
[@moreno_who_1934]. In school settings, for example, children were asked
to select classmates they preferred to sit with, revealing patterns of
ties, cliques, exclusions, and triangles. Although Moreno emphasized
psychological and behavioral principles like Homans, he conceptualized
these patterns as forming an emergent group structure and embraced an
organism-like view of social systems **(Q5)**. He also argued that
groups grow toward structured organization "just as the individual
organism grows toward maturity", and introduced the metaphor of "social
organs" to describe how attraction and repulsion shape group cohesion
over time. Although Moreno is remembered for his sociograms in social
network analysis, he occupies a position between group functionalism and
structuralism, gradually being embraced by methodological
individualists.

Whereas small-group research often focused on internal conformity and
local dynamics [@festinger_social_1950], other researchers began to
study influence as a network-level phenomenon. In *Personal Influence*
(1955), Katz and Lazarsfeld proposed a "two-step flow of communication"
model: media messages reach opinion leaders first, who then disseminate
them to their peers through interpersonal ties [@katz_personal_1955].
This reframed the question of influence as a function of social
structure rather than mass communication. Their notion of "group"
shifted from bounded entities to neighborhoods of influence embedded in
larger networks---groups not as cohesive wholes, but as relational
contexts acting on focal individuals.

Simmel's ideas on *duality*---the tension between individuals and their
group affiliations---resonated strongly with later developments in
social network analysis (SNA), particularly the use of dual-mode or
bipartite networks
[@breiger_duality_1974; @feld_focused_1981; @mcpherson_hypernetwork_1982; @moody_structural_2003].
In these models, one set of nodes represents individuals, and a second
set represents affiliations such as clubs, classrooms, shared events, or
co-authorships. Edges link individuals to the groups they belong to,
allowing researchers to study both the structure of affiliations and the
indirect ties they create between people. A common strategy involves
projecting bipartite networks into one-mode networks---connecting
individuals through shared memberships---which shapes network-level
properties such as density, transitivity, and clustering. Building on
Simmel's notion of overlapping social circles, Feld (1981) highlighted
how intersecting affiliations structure social opportunities,
emphasizing the trade-off between intimate ties that offer support and
peripheral ties that provide access to novel contexts
[@feld_focused_1981].

These affiliation-based approaches allow SNA to study group-structured
data while avoiding strong ontological commitments to groups as real
entities. Groups are typically treated as metadata---attributes of
individuals---rather than as entities with causal powers of their own
**(Q1)** [@wellman_structural_1988]. This nominalist framing has steered
empirical work toward **groups with well-defined membership lists
(Q8)**---such as voluntary associations, workplaces, and
classrooms---while sidelining more abstract questions about group
boundaries **(Q9)** or group-level persistence and transformation over
time **(Q12--13)**. Although SNA does not explicitly identify with
methodological individualism, it shares its underlying assumptions:
individuals remain the ontological primitives, and groups are inferred
from patterns of interaction rather than modeled as independent units.

Despite its emphasis on social structure, SNA generally rejected the
functionalist and organismic views associated with group realism. It
aligned more closely with MI by explaining macro-level outcomes in terms
of local ties and individual positions. The rise of MI paralleled the
geopolitical shift of the scientific center of gravity to the United
States. Influential European Ã©migrÃ©s---such as Schumpeter, von Mises,
and Hayek---helped popularize a vision of science grounded in individual
agency, free markets, and limited state intervention
[@oreskes_big_2023]. Ironically, both Spencer's social Darwinism and
Austrian economics ultimately converged in justifying social hierarchies
as the natural result of competition---whether biological or economic.
Yet, group realism kept coming back in different forms. In the following
sections, we explore how inter-firm competition, the challenge of
cooperation among unrelated individuals, and theories of collective
action have renewed interest in groups as units of analysis in their own
right.

**In Chapter
[\[chapter:interface\]](#chapter:interface){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter:interface"}, we discuss how group interactions are
increasingly modeled as distinct from pairwise interactions in models of
HONs. However, while these models capture the structural differences of
multi-way interactions, they typically stop short of adopting a stronger
ontology of groups. In contrast, by introducing group-level states
independent of individual states--as we do in Chapter
[\[chapter:coevo\]](#chapter:coevo){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter:coevo"}--we can more effectively model the
co-evolution of institutions and individuals. This allows us to capture
novel dynamics, such as the call for action effect in contagion
processes, where higher infection rates do not necessarily result in
larger outbreaks once institutional responses are taken into account.**

### The rise of organizational sciences and the new institutional economics

As MI and social network analysis gained prominence, both tended to
sideline groups as fundamental units of analysis---focusing instead on
individuals and their relational ties. However, beginning in the 1930s,
foundational work in organizational science began to reassert the
importance of formal organizations as distinctive social structures.
These were not just loose collections of individuals, but coordinated
entities characterized by "cooperation among men that is conscious,
deliberate, purposeful" [@barnard_functions_1938]. By the mid-20th
century, corporations such as IBM, General Motors, General Electric, and
Procter & Gamble had become dominant economic actors, each developing
their own internal hierarchies, rules, and goals. Rejecting traditional
economic assumptions, a new wave of scholars emphasized that many
organizational behaviors---such as managing transaction costs or setting
internal coordination mechanisms---could not be explained solely by
aggregating individual choices
[@coase_nature_1937; @simon_concept_1964; @williamson_transaction_1998].
As March and Simon (1958) put it: "High specificity of structure and
coordination within organizations---as contrasted with the diffuse and
variable relations among organizations and among unorganized
individuals---*marks off the individual organization as a sociological
unit comparable in significance to the individual organism in biology*"
[@march_organizations_1958]. In this way, the organism-like analogy
**(Q5)** reemerged---not through the lens of social cohesion or
collective consciousness, but as a rational-structural metaphor for
explaining how formal organizations achieve internal coherence
[@scott_organizations_2007].

Organizational science broadly concerns how groups of people, under
varying governance structures---rules, roles, norms---coordinate
collective action to achieve shared goals. Within economics,
institutional theorists explore how institutions shape economic
performance and social costs
[@north_institutions_1990; @williamson_transaction_1998]. One key
approach, transaction cost economics, explains the emergence of firms as
organized groups that reduce the costs of negotiating, monitoring, and
enforcing contracts [@coase_nature_1937]. Firms are defined by their
boundaries, within which coordination and ownership are facilitated
**(Q11)**.

Building on this, Nelson and Winter (1973) introduced an evolutionary
perspective on institutional change, viewing firms as competing units
within a market environment **(Q13)** [@nelson_toward_1973]. Douglass
North (1990) added a critical note: not all institutional changes are
optimal, and modeling must include feedback loops between human
perception and institutional structure [@north_institutions_1990].
Rather than rejecting functionalism entirely, these scholars called for
more principled evolutionary models of institutional persistence and
adaptation.

A second perspective understands institutions as formal and informal
rule systems that enable coordination and cooperation by reducing
uncertainty in social interactions
[@bowles_cooperative_2011; @smaldino_cultural_2014]. Drawing on
political science and rational choice theory, this view sees
institutions as providing structure to otherwise self-interested agents
[@hobbes_leviathan_1651]. In the 1960s, this perspective influenced
policy-making around resource governance, exemplified in Hardin's famous
"tragedy of the commons" [@hardin_tragedy_1968]. Without centralized
control or privatization, shared resources would be depleted by
self-serving behavior. Elinor Ostrom challenged this logic by showing
that under certain conditions, groups can successfully self-organize to
manage common-pool resources---without top-down coercion
[@ostrom_covenants_1992]. Her work showed that institutions do not
simply constrain behavior; they are also shaped by and embedded within
group-level dynamics.

Between these macro- and micro-perspectives lies a growing body of work
on group effectiveness within organizations **(Q18)**. Often referred to
as "team science", this field began in management and organizational
psychology but now spans complexity science and even the science of
science [@guimera_team_2005]. The central idea is that effective
organizations recognize groups---not individuals---as the key units of
coordination and problem-solving
[@leavitt_suppose_1974; @hackman_design_1987; @katzenbach_wisdom_1992].
Group performance (or synergy) is studied in work teams, sports teams,
and research collaborations, with attention to how diversity of
expertise and communication patterns shape outcomes
[@page_diversity_2019; @almaatouq_collective_2020; @mukherjee_prior_2019].
A recurring theme is the role of socialization **(Q17)**: how new
members internalize norms, adopt roles, and align their behaviors with
organizational culture [@ashforth_social_1989]. This echoes the early
work in social psychology on group identification and intergroup
behavior [@tolman_identification_1943].

Together, organizational science and institutional theory offer a new
framework for group realism to thrive. They suggest that
groups---especially formal organizations---are not reducible to
interpersonal ties or individual decisions. They are bounded,
persistent, and shaped by internal governance and external selection
pressures. They define boundaries in a way that makes modeling easier;
just use workgroups and teams within organizations, as they are
well-defined. But this answer, arguably, remains somewhat
unsatisfactory, ontologically speaking, even if useful.

### Institutional performance and the evolutionary dynamics of group-level features

In one sense, most would agree that groups can form, grow, dissolve, and
occasionally split into daughter groups **(Q12)**. Even Schumpeter,
despite popularizing methodological individualism, was deeply interested
in group dynamics. He is well-known for his work on the life cycle of
firms, arguing that capitalism is driven by a process of "creative
destruction," in which established organizations are periodically
replaced by newer and more innovative ones
[@schumpeter_capitalism_1942]. Yet, controversy resurfaces when such
processes---birth, death, reproduction---are thought to generate
selection pressure at the group level, thereby influencing the evolution
of individual traits **(Q5)**.

As originally formulated by Wynne-Edwards (1962), group selection
proposed that cooperative groups could outcompete less cooperative ones,
allowing altruistic traits to spread even if they were individually
costly [@wynne-edwards_animal_1962]. His application to bird populations
suggested that groups practicing reproductive restraint would persist
longer than those that overpopulated and collapsed. This was not a
return to the organism-like metaphor (where individuals are organs in a
body), but a more radical claim: that individuals might adopt costly
behaviors simply because they benefit the group
[@wilson_structured_1979]. This shifted the explanatory unit away from
the gene, but not without resistance. Unlike genes or individuals,
groups lack a clear physical boundary---which makes them harder to study
and harder to accept as legitimate units of selection.

Today, the emergence of cooperation is largely attributed to mechanisms
like *kin selection* and *positive assortment*---especially limited
interaction ranges that maintain altruistic traits among related or
similar individuals
[@trivers_evolution_1971; @hamilton_genetical_1964; @smaldino_cultural_2014].
Group selection, at least in its biological form, fell out of favor
partly because groups are rarely isolated enough to preserve
between-group variation while maintaining low variance within groups
[@mcelreath_mathematical_2007]. But cultural evolution offered a
potential solution. Unlike genes, cultural transmission mechanisms allow
for both the stabilization and selective amplification of group-level
traits.

In this context, *cultural group selection (CGS)*[^1] has gained
traction as a framework for explaining uniquely human forms of
cooperation
[@boyd_group_1990; @richerson_cultural_2016; @wilson_multilevel_2023].
CGS posits that culture can maintain high variation between groups and
low variation within groups, which are necessary conditions to discuss
natural selection. The first step is human cultural psychology itself:
we are adapted for learning from others, especially through mechanisms
such as *conformity, prestige bias* and *norm enforcement*. These
mechanisms promote within-group cohesion while preserving intergroup
diversity---supporting the emergence of stable group-level phenotypes,
scaffolded by shared expectations, norms, and roles.

The second step is intergroup competition leading to the selection of
cultural traits that help a group to thrive and reproduce---whether
through warfare, economic success, resource management, or
prestige-biased imitation---can spread, even if they are individually
costly. Darwin famously suggested in *The Descent of Man* (1871) that
tribes with more altruistic and patriotic members would prevail over
less cohesive ones [@darwin_descent_1871; @bowles_did_2009]. In recent
times, it has been shown that stateless warfare cultures do lead to the
expansion of overly cooperative groups, at the expense of groups that
are more peaceful in their ways of life.
[@turchin_war_2013; @turchin_warfare_2010; @bowles_did_2009].
Anthropological studies show that in a warfare context, cultural
boundaries are stronger; with the appropriate symbolic markers making
the difference between the life and death of individuals
[@turchin_ultrasociety_2016]. Even in a modern context, war is known to
amplify conformity, with group members being more inclined to punish
group members who deviate from group-beneficial norms
[@henrich_weirdest_2020]. While early theories centered on tribes and
ethnolinguistic groups with symbolic identity markers **(Q8, Q11)**,
more recent work extends these ideas to voluntary organizations such as
churches, monasteries, universities, and firms [@henrich_weirdest_2020].
In this view, *intergroup competition*---whether violent or
symbolic---is central **(Q16)**. What matters is that group-level traits
shape retention, imitation, and success at the group level.

This insight was paralleled by the rise of institutional and
organizational theory in the 1970s. Nelson and Winter extended
Schumpeter's theory of innovation to argue that firms exhibit
evolutionary dynamics: they vary in routines, strategies, and
capabilities and are subject to selective pressures based on performance
[@nelson_neoclassical_1974; @nelson_schumpeterian_1982]. They replaced
the optimizing rational actor with bounded rationality---where firms
adopt heuristics under incomplete information, often locking into
suboptimal yet stable trajectories. A classic example is the QWERTY
keyboard, a design maintained not by efficiency but by historical
constraints and institutional inertia.

Douglass North advanced this perspective by showing how
institutions---formal and informal rules---persist through "the learning
embodied in individuals, groups, and societies' and are transmitted
across generations [@north_rise_1973]. Though he did not initially adopt
this view, North came to see institutions as cumulative structures that
outlast individuals, shaping incentives and reducing uncertainty in
social interactions [@north_institutions_1990]. While he avoided making
explicit ontological claims about group realism, his work---alongside
that of Nelson and Winter---helped shift attention from individual
behavior to the evolution of group-level capabilities. Like Boyd and
Richerson, Campbell, and others, they sought to explain how
institutional performance could be subject to evolutionary pressures,
without presupposing that any observed collective behavior is
necessarily adaptive.

Together, CGS and institutional theory imply that *group-level traits
can evolve, persist, and exert causal influence independently of
individuals*. For modelers, this raises several conceptual and practical
questions: Are group-level traits reducible to individual strategies
**(Q18)**? What boundaries are required for selection to act at the
group level **(Q11)**? How do cultural and institutional inheritance
mechanisms differ from genetic ones? And how do individual learning
dynamics interact with group performance and evolution? These questions
demand explicit attention to *cross-level dynamics*---how individual
decisions scale up into group-level outcomes, and how group-level norms
or structures feed back into individual incentives. We address these
modeling challenges in the next section, beginning with the idea that
some group traits are not just emergent but irreducible.

## Working with groups

Modeling group interactions is challenging due to its polysemous social
ontology. They involve distinct ways of belonging---and different
understandings of what it means to be part of a group. Consider the
following statements

::: spacing
1.10

1.  Your group taps maple trees and extract sap around February every
    year.

2.  Your group rioted the city when your favorite hockey player was
    suspended.

3.  Your group of workers, united under a common banner, demands minimum
    wages from the state for all its members.

4.  Your group was 'stabbed in the back' when your country achieved full
    sovereignty.
:::

Each of the above group interactions has a different scale with varying
implications. The first two examples are driven by concrete collective
action problems, while the latter two rely more heavily on mutual
understanding and shared narratives. Crucially, they all require
different kinds of institutions---formal and informal rules that bind
individual behavior to varying degrees, and in doing so, reshape the
nature of group interaction itself. Before diving into our typology and
sorting those into dimensions grounded in network science, we briefly
review how researchers have engaged with the empirical study of groups.
We identify three main approaches that researchers are using with groups
and relevant results derived from them (see Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}).

##### The study of well-defined groups {#the-study-of-well-defined-groups .unnumbered}

First, in the study of firms and teams, researchers tend to leave out
the membership question (**Q8**) and focus on what is given; as in small
group research, teams are thought to be well-defined groups engaged in
specific tasks [@bavelas_communication_1950; @hackman_design_1987],
while firms are based on membership. In organizational and information
science, there is a consensus that small teams (number of coauthors,
working groups, focus groups, core software developers) perform best
with fewer than ten people; above this number, they are considered
'large' groups, which requires addressing coordination and communication
challenges
[@isaac_group_1988; @hall_science_2018; @national_research_council_enhancing_2015].

At the other end of the spectrum, we have unions and firms. In the third
example, the union claimed to represent 200,000 workers (taking place in
1972, the national union density of the province was around 35% at that
time), based on the number of union cards (Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}d). Already in 1958, researchers were
investigating firm size distribution, showing that it follows a
heavy-tail distribution [@bonini_decision_1958]. Axtell provides us with
a snapshot of Zipf's law of firm sizes (2001), with the largest firm
having more than one million employees (see Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}d) [@axtell_zipf_2001]. Since Axtell
published his work, we find firms such as Walmart with 2.1 million
employees. It is a million short of meeting the largest union, *The
National Education Association*, with its 3 million members.

![Scale of groups I](Chapters/figs/scaleOfGroups.pdf){#fig:ScaleOfGroups
width="\\linewidth"}

Yet, as a hierarchical organization, unions can be said to resemble
"tribes" in anthropology, sharing a collective identity and forming
alliances in larger conflicts. In our example, the union was divided
into three main "clans," bound by shared norms and institutions, acting
as independent political units. This scale of organization was crucial
in tribal warfare, influenced by territorial resources. Although
higher-level institutions are present, small-scale cooperation continues
to operate at the local level, with a total of 1,701 local unions
averaging around 155 members each (similar to Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}a,
[1.3](#fig:ScaleOfGroups2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups2"}f, and to the camp sizes shown in Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}b). At this scale, models suggest that
monitoring free-riding---individuals who benefit from collective payoffs
without bearing individual costs---becomes increasingly difficult, as
mechanisms of direct and indirect reciprocity are harder to enforce
[@boyd_evolution_1988; @ostrom_covenants_1992]. Yet, a review of
historical and archaeological evidence suggests that this level of
cooperation among unrelated individuals has been typical at least since
the late Pleistocene and Holocene
[@boyd_largescale_2022; @casari_group_2018].

##### The study of collective action problems

We find some groups that do not fit neatly into the categories of small
teams or large-scale cooperation. First, research teams in academia or
the smallest groups that cooperate for subsistence in the d-place
database show a non-negligible proportion of teams with more than ten
members, though they do not approach the empirical mean of the
common-pool resources (CPR) database (see Fig.
[1.3](#fig:ScaleOfGroups2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups2"}a). Second, there are evidently papers
with more than 10 coauthors, with the largest having over 5,000 (a
practice called hyper-authorship). This is more akin to the size of
large movie crews, which, to date, have a slightly lower maximum (3,310
people were credited for Iron Man 3). As with movie crews, larger
coauthors exhibit differentiated roles, which we discuss next in the
context of group-level features. When this is the case, group boundaries
are derived from theoretical frameworks; one of the most well-known
being that of CPR.

In her pioneering work on the governance of CPR ( **Q15**), Elinor
Ostrom is well-known for publishing an extensive codebook defining all
aspects of the enterprise [@ostrom_cpr_1989]. In it, she and her
collaborators mention that to be considered part of "well-defined"
groups (**Q11**); individuals, and not their households (only the person
who can extract the CPR), must have the ability to appropriate relevant
resources. Hence, the boundaries of the group are established by a more
or less formal agreement among group members, which her is defined by
the CPR theoretical framework. In Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}a, we show the result of 86 case studies
by Ostrom, revealing that the average size of well-defined groups
participating in a CPR is around 154 individuals. If we consider the
broader definition of the actual group size of individuals who were
somewhat involved in the CPR, the mean increases to about 233
individuals. Anthropologists have shown that this level of cooperation,
which includes unrelated individuals, can be traced back as far as
10,000 years, with traditional societies engaged in communal hunts or
constructing shared capital facilities [@boyd_largescale_2022].

**In Chapter
[\[chapter:groupSkills\]](#chapter:groupSkills){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter:groupSkills"}, we introduce a group-based model of
skill emergence in research groups, framed as a public goods problem. We
use programming in the humanities as a case study, where groups may face
institutional pressure to include computational expertise, creating
incentives for individuals to learn programming---even when the personal
cost is high. This highlights a dynamic in the science of science:
accounting for the tension between group-level pressures and
individual-level costs offers new insights into how scientific practices
evolve.**

##### The ontology of cultural databases {#the-ontology-of-cultural-databases .unnumbered}

In our fourth example, the ethnolinguistic subgroup is Quebec in 1981,
comprising 6.3 million people within a Canada-wide population of
approximately 27 million. The story of your group being 'stabbed' is
about what Quebecois call "La Nuit des longs couteaux" in French, while
English Canadians know it as the "Kitchen Accord". Both refer to a
compromise in November 1981 between federal Justice Minister Jean
ChrÃ©tien and two provincial ministers that paved the way for the
patriation of the Canadian Constitution---without Quebec's consent---by
resolving disputes over an amending formula and a Charter of Rights. The
story is somewhat scale-independent; but if enough people believe in it,
it becomes ingrained in society as a powerful myth that can prevent the
blending of cultures, stir social protests, and maintain strong
boundaries between the subgroup within a territory and the rest of the
country.

In discussing the challenges of cultural evolutionary databases,
Slingerland et al. (2024) highlight the necessity of committing to a
particular group ontology [@slingerland_database_2024]. For example,
they note that Seshat: The Global History Databank
[@turchin_seshat_2015] (Fig.
[1.3](#fig:ScaleOfGroups2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups2"}a), by focusing on polities (i.e.,
politically autonomous groups), loses granularity in tracking the
evolution of cultural traits---such as religious beliefs---that may not
align neatly with broader political boundaries. In contrast, the
Environmental Diversity (D-PLACE)[@kirby_d-place_2016] focuses on
ethnolinguistic groups as typically found in traditional societies (Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}c).

![Scale of groups
II](Chapters/figs/scaleOfGroups2.pdf){#fig:ScaleOfGroups2
width="\\linewidth"}

The Database of Religious History (DRH) [@slingerland_coding_2020] is a
recent cultural database that focuses on fine-grained details to
precisely measure variations from the perspective of specific
group-level feature traits. In the DRH, cultural traits are presented as
a number of domain-driven questions about different polls--such as the
religious institutions poll--filled out by experts in the field. As
such, the DRH distinguishes between reporting group affiliation and more
stringent measures such as the frequency of participation in group
activities and the significance of the group to individuals (Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}f). However, the DRH is noteworthy in that
it also invites experts from the humanities to weigh in on particular
cultural topics, such as estimating the number of adherents of religious
groups. Here are a few excerpts that highlight the ontological challenge
of such an undertaking:

-   [Mithraism (100 CE - 400 CE; part of the Roman Empire
    region)]{.smallcaps}: "This is a guesstimate, starting from a
    reasonable guess at the number of Mithraists in c. 200 CE in Ostia
    (pop. c. 60,000) as c. 600 (c. 15 mithraea in the city's excavated
    area = half its total area; a mithraeum on average seats 20:
    15x2x20=600), then extrapolating to the Roman Empire (pop. c. 60M),
    but cutting the resulting number to 1/30th---here's where the use of
    demographics gets really disreputable, but you wanted an estimate,
    didn't you?---to allow for the fact that Ostia was a city of
    particular cult concentration. Note 1) the sample region is
    coextensive with the spread of the cult, i.e. the Roman Empire. 2)
    The \"adherents\" were exclusively adult males." -Professor Roger
    Beck at University Toronto in Historical Studies, expert on
    Mithraism.

-   "Estimate of the population of the city of Amarna. Unclear whether
    they were all believers and whether there were believers outside the
    city of Amarna., Sources:: Barry Kemp: The City of Akhenaten and
    Nefertiti. 2012, 272." -Professor Thomas Schneider at University of
    British Column in Egyptology and Near Eastern Studies.

-   [Northern Irish Protestants (2015-2016)]{.smallcaps}"As
    \"Protestant\" is also used to refer to an ethnic group in Northern
    Ireland, it is difficult to estimate how many of those who claim to
    be \"Protestant\" practice the religion, or even necessarily believe
    in it's core tenets." -PhD candidate Samuel Ward at the Institute of
    Cognition and Culture.

These excerpts show the inherent challenges in studying groups, as human
socio-cultural groups are shaped by our interpretation of the
interaction between institutional arrangements and individual
psychology. It helps model the group as inter-ethnic interaction between
members of groups that differ in size and prestige, as well as in power,
as with the "kitchen accord" [@bunce_sustainability_2018]. In that
sense, it is not so far from unions, but cultural variation structured
by ethnic identity is deeper in that it is shaped in the ontogeny of
group members and is marked by a degree of spatial structure
[@bunce_ethnicity_2022]. Whereas unions and teams can sometimes use
list-based membership as a proxy for group membership, *group-level
features*--norms, beliefs, stories, or institutions--require a more
extensive modeling effort and stronger ontologies to study them.

Similarly, to conclude our second example on measuring protest,
measuring protest can be as simple as counting people in a march. For
instance, the number of participants in the so-called Richard riot (in
honor of Maurice Richard, taking place in 1955) was estimated to be
about 6,000 people. Although it was fairly small in terms of size
compared to medieval protests in Europe, it was significant for its
people nonetheless (see Fig.
[1.2](#fig:ScaleOfGroups){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:ScaleOfGroups"}b). In the HisCOD database, they typically
filtered out data from databases of social protests
[@chambru_introducing_2024]. But an alternative way would be to commit
to the view of protest as having a role within cultural evolution, where
its shape and numbers depend on what it accomplished at the societal
level.

Groups can be studied using a well-defined, list-based definition.
However, without explicit models of group interactions, drawing
principled conclusions about their nature remains difficult. In the
absence of a clear cultural ontology, group boundaries risk being
defined for convenience---leading to conclusions based on what is
easiest to observe. We argue that the models from the physics of HONs
provide a useful framework for modeling diverse group interactions, but
a clearer roadmap is needed to guide this effort.

[^1]: We take cultural group selection and multilevel selection theory,
    as developed by D.S. Wilson, E. Sober, and others, as formally
    equivalent here. Both frameworks rely on the related formalism, and
    importantly opposing the same methodological individualism seen in
    biology and the social sciences.
